feat: Editorial review: Add content for overlay and discrete animation features (#29943)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/css_animations/using_css_animations/index.md

{{EmbedLiveSample('Using_animation_events', '600', '300')}}

## Animating display and content-visibility

> Historically, the [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) and [`content-visibility`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/content-visibility) properties were not animatable. The specs changed however, and supporting browsers (see the reference links for details) now animate them with a [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete). This generally means that properties will flip between two values `50%` through animating between the two.
> 
> There is an exception, however, which is when animating to/from `display: none` or `content-visibility: hidden`. In this case, the browser will flip between the two values so that the animated content is shown for `100%` of the animation duration.
> 
> So for example:
> 
> - When animating between `display` `none` and `block`, the value will flip to `block` at `0%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not all properties are animatable. According to the specifications, [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) and [`content-visibility`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/content-visibility) properties are two of these. When non-animatable properties are included in a keyframe, they are generally ignored. These two properties are an exception; they support a [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete). 

Generally, in discrete animations, the animating property will flip between two values at the midpoint between the two keyframes setting values for that discretely animated property. These two values are an exception. When animating to or from `display: none` and to or from `content-visibility: hidden`, the browser will change to the visible value immediately at the start of the animation so that the animated content is shown for the entirety of the animation's duration.

This means, when animating an element between `display` `none` and `block` (or any other visible value), the value will flip to the visible value immediately after the expiration of the `animation-delay`, at the start of the animation duration, , when the `animationStart` event occurs, so it is visible throughout, whether the visible display value is at the `0%`, `100%`, or `27.5%` keyframe.
```

Reviewer: what happens if animation-fill-mode is set?

Author: I kind of did this, but handled it differently.

`animation-fill-mode` behaves the same as it does with any other animation - I've used the `forwards` value in my examples, so that it stays like it is at the end of the animation after it finishes.

> - When animating between `display` `block` and `none`, the value will flip to `none` at `100%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, when animating between `display: block` (or any other visible display value) and `display: none`, the value will wait until the animation ends, staying visible through all the animation interactions if there is more than one, and only flipping to `none` when the `animationEnd` event occurs, so it is visible throughout.
```
I did not test this.

Author: Explanation seems like overkill; I think mine is Ok as-is (provided of course if it is true!)

Let's put all of this together into a working example.

### HTML

The HTML contains a simple instruction message plus a {{htmlelement("div")}} that we will animate from `display` `none` to `block`.

```html
<p>
  Click anywhere on the screen or press any key to toggle the
  <code>&lt;div&gt;</code> between hidden and showing.
</p>

<div>
  This is a <code>&lt;div&gt;</code> element that animates between
  <code>display: none; opacity: 0</code> and
  <code>display: block; opacity: 1</code>. Neat, huh?
</div>
```

### CSS

The CSS is as follows:

```css
html {
  height: 100vh;
}

div {
  font-size: 1.6rem;
  padding: 20px;
  border: 3px solid red;
  border-radius: 20px;
  width: 480px;
  opacity: 0;
}

/* Animation classes */

div.fade-in {
  animation: fade-in 0.7s ease-in forwards;
}

div.fade-out {
  animation: fade-out 0.7s ease-out forwards;
}

/* Animation keyframes */

@keyframes fade-in {
  0% {
    opacity: 0;
    display: none;
  }

  100% {
    opacity: 1;

>     display: block;

Reviewer: This does not show that its working since non-supporting browsers just ignore the display rules. How about this example: https://codepen.io/estelle/pen/JjxbbJL - it switched to inline when animating

>     display: block;

Reviewer: The codepen example doesn't have any JS, which i prefer for CSS explanations.

>     display: block;

Reviewer 2: @estelle in your codepen demo I think `div:hover { }` should be `div:hover span {}`. Otherwise the blinking div is very annoying.

>     display: block;

Reviewer: we could use my example, but change the "inline" to "flex" and center the text ONLY during the animation so it is apparent that the `display: flex` set in the animation is actually set.

>     display: block;

Author: I suppose my issue really is that yes, your example does show a display animation being applied. But, I worry that it isn't very real world. People are far more likely to want to animate from `display: none` to `block` really, and use it as a means for showing/hiding panels, etc.

So, I've spent another absolute age messing around with this stuff today, and updated my example. I'm quite pleased with the end result — I've got two paragraphs, and a div in between that animates from display to block. You can see that the display value is animating because the space between the two paragraphs disappears when it gets to display: none.

My main concern is that the CSS is inelegant and a bit hackish:

```css
div {
  font-size: 1.6rem;
  padding: 20px;
  border: 3px solid red;
  border-radius: 20px;
  width: 480px;
  opacity: 0;
  display: none;
}

/* Animation classes */

div.fade-in {
  display: block;
  animation: fade-in 0.7s ease-in forwards;
}
```

I had to set display: none on the div's starting state so that it starts hidden, but then I has to set display: block on the faded-in state as well as applying the animation, otherwise the original display: none overrides the animation and it never displays.

I also thought about how to do it without JS, but I kept the JS in the end. Starting from display: none, there is nothing to hover to allow the animation to be applied via direct state change. I also tried to create an example where you hover an adjacent element to make the div appear and disappear, but I had all sorted of interesting problems trying to get that to work.

So, any suggestions on how to improve this example will be much appreciated.

{{EmbedLiveSample('Using_animation_events', '600', '300')}}

> ## Animating display and content-visibility

Author: Good call. I've changed this H2 -> H3, and all the sub-H3s to H4s

Supporting browsers animate [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) and [`content-visibility`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/content-visibility) with a variation on the [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete). This generally means that properties will flip between two values `50%` of the way through animating between the two.

> There is an exception, however, which is when animating to/from `display: none` or `content-visibility: hidden` to a visible value. In this case, the browser will flip between the two values so that the animated content is shown for `100%` of the animation duration.

Author: I've gone for a slightly simpler edit. I think your text, while precise, is going to be harder to understand.

So for example:

- When animating between `display` `none` and `block` (or another visible `display` value), the value will flip to `block` at `0%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.
- When animating between `display` `block` (or another visible `display` value) and `none`, the value will flip to `none` at `100%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.

This behavior is useful for creating entry/exit animations where you want to for example remove a container from the UI with `display: none`, but have it fade out smoothly with [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) rather than disappearing immediately.

Let's put all of this together into a working example.

> ### HTML

Author: changed

The HTML contains two {{htmlelement("p")}} elements with a {{htmlelement("div")}} in between that we will animate from `display` `none` to `block`.

```html
<p>
  Click anywhere on the screen or press any key to toggle the
  <code>&lt;div&gt;</code> between hidden and showing.
</p>

<div>
  This is a <code>&lt;div&gt;</code> element that animates between
  <code>display: none; opacity: 0</code> and
  <code>display: block; opacity: 1</code>. Neat, huh?
</div>

<p>
  This is another paragraph to show that <code>display: none; </code> is being
  applied and removed on the above <code>&lt;div&gt; </code>. If only its
  <code>opacity</code> was being changed, it would always take up the space in
  the DOM.
</p>
```

> ### CSS

Author: changed

```css
html {
  height: 100vh;
}

div {
  font-size: 1.6rem;
  padding: 20px;
  border: 3px solid red;
  border-radius: 20px;
  width: 480px;
  opacity: 0;
  display: none;
}

/* Animation classes */

div.fade-in {
  display: block;
  animation: fade-in 0.7s ease-in forwards;
}

div.fade-out {
  animation: fade-out 0.7s ease-out forwards;
}

/* Animation keyframes */

@keyframes fade-in {
  0% {
    opacity: 0;
    display: none;
  }

  100% {
    opacity: 1;
    display: block;
  }
}

@keyframes fade-out {
  0% {
    opacity: 1;
    display: block;
  }

  100% {
    opacity: 0;
    display: none;
  }
}
```

Note the inclusion of the `display` property in the keyframe animations. When animating `display` or `content-visibility`, you need to provide the starting value in an explicit starting keyframe (for example using `0%` or `from`).

> ### JavaScript

Author: changed

Finally, we include a bit of JavaScript to set up event listeners to trigger the animations. Specifically, we add the `fade-in` class to the `<div>` when we want it to appear, and `fade-out` when we want it to disappear.

```js
const divElem = document.querySelector("div");
const htmlElem = document.querySelector(":root");

htmlElem.addEventListener("click", showHide);
document.addEventListener("keydown", showHide);

function showHide() {
  if (divElem.classList[0] === "fade-in") {
    divElem.classList.remove("fade-in");
    divElem.classList.add("fade-out");
  } else {
    divElem.classList.remove("fade-out");
    divElem.classList.add("fade-in");
  }
}
```

> ### Result

Author: changed
